Using image measurements to understand and acquire properties of the physical world (such as the shape of an object, the reflectance of a surface, or the lighting in a room) is a critical capability for many sciences including medicine, material fabrication, remote sensing, robotics, autonomous navigation, architectural design, computer graphics, and computer vision.
At a high level, these properties can be found by taking images and using computational algorithms to infer unknown parameters from the measurements.
Broadly, the inference algorithms can be classified into two categories.
On the one hand, physics-based algorithms try to analytically model and then invert the physics underlying the process of how a scene of certain parameters produces measured images; these algorithms are generally accurate but require a lot of computation.
On the other hand, data-driven algorithms use supervised datasets to learn how to directly map measurements to unknowns; these algorithms are computationally efficient but are not guaranteed to produce accurate predictions.
This project aims to transform physical acquisition pipelines, by creating general-purpose computational tools that combine the advantages of physics-based and machine-learning-based techniques, and that are simultaneously efficient, accurate and robust.
By developing the theory and computational tools for this integration of simulation and learning, the project has the potential for transformative impact in application areas like industrial quality control, material science, oceanography, and biomedical imaging.
Widespread adoption of project outcomes will be encouraged by making new software publicly available, as well as by offering tutorials and workshops in computer graphics, vision, and imaging conferences.
The project also includes an education and outreach program that is tightly coupled to the research objectives, and which takes the form of courses, summer workshops, and lab visits for K-12 students intended to introduce them to science at an early stage and encourage STEM education.
Additionally, the project will contribute towards broadening participation in computing through targeted involvement in existing programs in the participating institutions that focus on outreach to female students, first-generation students, and students from traditionally underrepresented minorities.<br/><br/>This project aims to transform physical acquisition pipelines by creating general-purpose computational tools that enable efficient and robust inference.
This will be achieved by coupling physics-based and learning-based approaches, in a way that combines their complementary strengths of accuracy, generality, and efficiency.
Three core areas of research will contribute to this.
First, the project will develop inference pipelines that synergistically combine neural networks with analysis by synthesis optimization, in order to efficiently produce high-fidelity estimates of physical parameters.
Neural networks will be trained in a physics-aware manner, by using physically-accurate renderers as layers in their architecture; this will allow the neural networks to simultaneously leverage supervised information and physical knowledge when making predictions.
Second, a new class of physically accurate differentiable renderers will be created, which will enable this tight integration of physics and learning without the need to sacrifice computational efficiency.
Instead of images, differentiable renderers will estimate their derivatives with respect to scene parameters; this estimation will be performed in a physically accurate way, using physical simulation algorithms derived from first principles and benefiting from innovations targeting improved efficiency.
Finally, the advantages of the developed inference tools will be demonstrated in a diverse range of applications such as autonomous sensing, material science and fabrication, and biomedical imaging.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019, Research Using Biological Collections.
The fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in innovative ways.
The fellow is investigating the environmental causes of recent decreases in animal body size.
Across species and the globe, animal body size has decreased suggesting a response to some major environmental change occurring over the past 50-100 years.
This research clarifies what environmental factor is driving this decrease in body size by untangling the effects of two common factors known to affect animal body size, temperature and resource abundance.
Additionally, while most studies have not considered if species have been responding genetically to climate change, this study sheds light on whether temperature or resource abundance is causing populations to evolve.
Uncovering what pressures organisms are responding to and how they are responding is fundamental to our understanding of how organisms react to rapid environmental change and will affect conservation efforts.<br/><br/>The fellow is combining museum specimens of the native bee Ceratina calcarata from the past hundred years with climate and land use data to reconstruct how bee populations have responded to environmental change.
Since close populations have experienced similar temperature but different land use regimes, a proxy for local resource abundance, the fellow has the opportunity to uncouple the effect of temperature and resource abundance on body size.
The fellow is tracking the temporal changes in body size among these populations to see if size correlates with the average yearly temperature or the local resource abundance.
The fellow is also using comparative genomics of historical and recent populations to determine if temporal and spatial changes in gene frequencies at areas of the genome identified as being under selection correlate predictably with temperature or resource abundance, indicative of adaptive evolution.
The fellow is being trained in molecular genetics and genomic methods, which will expand the fellow's understanding of evolutionary genomics and complement the fellow's background in evolutionary ecology and behavioral ecology.
Additionally, the fellow is mentoring graduate and undergraduate students in using biological collections, experimental design, hypothesis testing, and manuscript preparation and publishing, as well as developing inquiry-based science modules in collaboration with local middle schools.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Sediments and sedimentary rocks record how mountains are built, when climate changes, how sea level fluctuates, and the processes that erode, move, and deposit sediment.
This information can inform our understanding of modern Earth surface processes, natural hazards, and environmental systems crucial to sustainable food and water resources.
A key location to study these processes is in the Peloritani Mountains, northeastern Sicily, where the mountains are going up rapidly as a result of large and frequent earthquakes.
Hillslopes are prone to landslides during both earthquakes and violent storms, sending large amounts of sediment into the rivers.
This sediment is transported downstream to a narrow, densely-populated coastal strip, where it spreads out forming a delta at sea level.
This project documents episodes of sediment deposition in the deltas and uses computer models to decipher the causative processes.
This research will better constrain how the Peloritani Mountain landscape responds to earthquakes, climate, landslides, flash floods, and sea level variability.
Results from this work will help inform the local populace on geologic hazards in the region.
The project provides support for graduate students, early career post-doctoral researchers, and educational outreach to underrepresented groups at the K-12 level.<br/><br/>This project focuses on the construction of a source to sink landscape evolution model (LEM) informed by sediment yield and rock-magnetic cyclostratigraphic data to explore how quasi-periodic and stochastic tectonic forcings are encoded, shredded, propagated, and preserved in sedimentary archives.
With a relatively small drainage area (< 500 km2), uniform bedrock, and a known history of climate and base level variation, the study area offers an unparalleled natural experiment that scales well to a LEM exploring the geomorphic and sedimentologic responses to tectonic forcings in a system with low source storage.
The project tests hypotheses that changes in rates of rock uplift on short earthquake cycles to long secular uplift time scales (1) impact the response time and the autogenic periods of the system, lengthening both, (2) impact the grain size and sediment yield of the source independent of, and unique to, responses driven by periodic climate change, and (3) impart unique stratal onlap and offlap geometries, bed thickness, textural, and rock-magnetic variations in the sink, distinct from those imparted by periodic climatic forcing and quasi-periodic autogenic processes.
The project incorporates a modeling strategy that merges Landlab in the source to Sedflux in the sink in order to predict unsteadiness in the source sediment flux and the resulting basin depositional architecture for a tightly linked source-to-sink system.
LEM predictions are evaluated against lithostratigraphy, rock-magnetic cyclostratigraphy, terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide (TCN)-determined modern and paleo-erosion rates, and sediment accumulation rates in fan deltas determined by optical luminescence.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This project engages a collaborating team of experimental microbiologists, computational biologists, and mathematicians to understand the mechanisms by which soil bacterium Myxococcus xanthus aggregates into multicellular mounds in response to starvation.
Using mathematical and biological approaches, the team will uncover interactions that control different stages of developmental self-organization: (1) pre-aggregation cell alignment and formation of cellular streams; (2) formation and growth of initial aggregates; and (3) aggregate coarsening, dispersal, and pulsing.
This project is expected to elucidate some of the general mechanisms behind the collective behavior of motile cells in other organisms and to develop widely applicable mathematical approaches.
Transition from single cells to multicellularity is fundamentally important to increase understanding of many pathogenic bacteria and to elucidate self-organization in more complex systems.
Even though individual bacterial cells are considered to function independently and to be autonomous, many bacterial populations will act collectively, communicating, moving and self-organizing into multicellular structures.
M. xanthus is a great model system for studying biological self-organization: its cells function fine alone, but cooperate to form variety of distinct, dynamic patterns depending on environmental conditions.
However, the mechanisms of these behaviors are currently not fully understood.
Broader impacts of the project will be further enhanced by training opportunities for participating students.
Solving complex biological problems requires a new generation of life scientists with cross-disciplinary training in both experimental and computational methods.
This research will provide those training opportunities for all participants, facilitated by close interactions such as joint meetings and trainee collaborations.
<br/><br/>This project focuses on solving one of the fundamental problems of modern developmental biology: how individual cells self-organize into multicellular structures.
In particular, the goal of the research is to uncover mechanisms controlling the developmental program of a biofilm formed by M. xanthus.
This soil bacterium is tractable and has a relatively simple genome and as such is an excellent model system to develop novel mathematical models and experimentally test their predictions.
Under starvation, M. xanthus cells coordinate their movement in space and time, bringing tens of thousands of cells together into multicellular aggregates to differentiate into spores.
This model of prokaryotic development is experimentally tractable and shares many of the complexities that are ubiquitous in developmental systems.
With a combination of mathematical modeling approaches and quantitative experiments, this project will uncover the interactions and signaling mechanisms that control three distinct stages of developmental self-organization.
To this end, the research builds on the previously fruitful methodology to connect these interactions with the observed population phenotypes.
The emphasis of the mathematical component of this research is on the advancement of agent-based and kinetic models that go beyond the existing, oversimplified models of the phenomena that postulate and analyze a single mechanism for self-organization.
The resulting predictions will be tested experimentally using genetic or environmental perturbations.
Broader impacts include developing novel and widely applicable methodology to understand multicellular patterns, cross-disciplinary training for participating students, and educational and outreach activities based on the research results and methods.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The project concerns the anomalous spectral and diffusive properties of quasiperiodic and other deterministic and random structures.
This is research on the fundamental properties of disordered systems that serve as models of systems with impurities.
Quasiperiodic operators provide central or important models for integer quantum Hall effect, experimental quasicrystals and the quantum chaos theory.
The development of the rigorous theory is expected to contribute to the understanding of all the above phenomena, and in particular, may lead to finding new materials with desired physical properties.
Disordered systems are also used in modeling many other micro and macro effects: from quantum localization to earthquakes.
The proposed topics include studying properties of both highly and weakly disordered systems of Quantum Mechanics that demonstrate certain anomalous behavior.
An integral part of the project concerns educating graduate students and other young researchers.
<br/><br/>The project consists of several parts.
One is to prove the extended states for multidimensional quasiperiodic operators.
Another is to study the effects of interaction in tight-binding quasi-periodic models.
One more is to develop a new, determinantal, approach to multidimensional Anderson localization.
Other important objectives are the study of issues related to certain models of quantum chaos.
The project involves the continuing development of non-perturbative methods for the proofs of localization type effects both in Schrodinger operators and in quantum spin systems, percolation and contact processes in disordered environments, as well as for the study of absolutely continuous spectrum.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This project aims to develop three co-located bristlecone pine proxies to address three very different and key fundamental aspects of Holocene climate that include precipitation variability, temperature variability, and volcanism.
Long proxy records of these three variables can be used to both drive and evaluate general circulation models thereby providing a testing ground for further understanding of Holocene climate dynamics.
The goal of this project is to significantly improve the evaluation of Holocene-scale paleoclimatic change in western North America.<br/><br/>The potential Broader Impacts include developing a dataset of new measurements and analyses of Holocene climate, participation and support of students in the project, development of new educational exhibits at the Arizona's Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) which sees over 10,000 individuals per year (including K-12, University students, and the public), and recruiting and working with minority students through the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans (SACNAS) via Western Washington University.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This objective of this research project is to benefit the national interests by advancing the field of thermoacoustic energy generation using innovative concepts in metamaterials and acoustic wave control.
Such systems have the potential to revolutionize modern-era energy generation by providing a clean and sustainable alternative to traditional energy systems.
Thermoacoustic systems involve no combustion and therefore mitigate major concerns over the environmental footprint of fossil-fuel-based energy in the U.S. economy.
The realization of thermoacoustic systems has the potential to impact a wide range of applications including space power generation, solar energy scavenging and waste heat recovery.
Almost all thermoacoustic systems suffer from two inherent limitations: Low power density and design complexity.
This award supports fundamental research to address both limitations by leveraging tools from dynamics and controls combined with the unique wave filtering capabilities of acoustic metamaterials.
The multi-disciplinary project will develop new tools to enhance the learning experience of students in the fields of dynamics, acoustics and sustainable energy generation, and will broaden participation of underrepresented groups through a range of outreach activities.
<br/><br/>ThermoAcoustic Generators (TAGs) are devices engineered to spontaneously generate powerful sound waves from a heat source which are then harnessed as electricity or mechanical motion.
They have the potential to approach the entropic limit imposed by thermodynamics.
This project seeks to reach this limit by developing a novel class of metamaterial-based TAGs which rely on the optimal control of phasing between pressure and velocity which prevents the formation of permanent standing waves in the acoustic resonator.
The desirable acoustic conditions are achieved without additional bulk structures.
Instead, inevitable nonlinearities emerging from the small and complex pores of the thermoacoustic stack will be used to synthesize a new TAG chamber that enables traveling thermoacoustic waves to propagate to one end of the resonator (where energy scavenging takes place via electro-acoustic transduction) while impeding boundary reflections.
This work will combine tools from dynamic systems theory with state-of-the-art experimental and laboratory-scale investigations.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The emerging internet of things (IoT) paradigm is predicted to support extremely large networks with a massive number of devices.
Given the importance that IoT device are expected to play in the future communication infrastructure, it is important to understand the fundamental limits of performance of such large networks.
Classically the performance limits of communications networks are studied by using a framework of information theory -- a science put forth by the pioneering engineer and scientist Claude Shannon.
The goal of this research is to expand the set of tools needed for the analysis of future communication networks.
Specifically, the aim is to bring necessary tools from estimation theory---a branch of statistics dealing with the recovery of noisy data.
The proposed work will advance knowledge by developing a unified view of communication networks through the lens of information and estimation theories.
In summary, the successful completion of the project is expected to contribute new mathematical and engineering tools, fundamentally new perspectives and models, in order to enable efficient design of the next generation of communication infrastructure.<br/><br/>A specific goal of this research is to study information flow over large networks by using a network transform that maps a problem of information flow over an arbitrary network to a well-structured estimation theoretic problem.
In other words, instead of analyzing the problem in the classical information theoretic domain, the proposed transform offers a new estimation theoretic domain for analyzing performance of communication networks.
The key attractive feature of the proposed network transform is that the underlying estimation theoretic optimization problem is a tractable one.
By providing new insights and tools for studying optimal information flow over the networks via estimation theoretic techniques, this research has the potential not only to advance theory but also to improve latency, energy efficiency and robustness of emerging IoT applications.
This project is a collaborative effort between researchers in the US and Israel, with funding for Israeli researchers provided by the Bi-National Science Foundation (BSF).<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs.
It is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences.
The award to Fayetteville State University has potential broader impacts in a number of areas.
The goal of the project is to obtain a better understanding of the thermal, optical, and electronic properties of organic semiconductors.
Such understanding will provide guidelines for the design, synthesis and fabrication of highly efficient polymer solar cells to the renewable energy industry.
Undergraduate students will gain research experiences and the research will be integrated in an undergraduate course.<br/><br/>The research goals of the project are to (1) investigate the conditions for optimum solar cell coverage, (2) examine the impact of polymer conformation, molecular architecture of acceptors, and nano-morphology on charge generation, (3) understand the interface electronic properties in connection with charge separation dynamics, and (4) determine the importance of charge and thermal transport in non-fullerene polymer solar cells.
Optical spectroscopy, charge transport measurements and morphological and structural characterizations will be used for completion of the project.
The findings from this research will provide future directions for polymer and non-fullerene acceptor synthesis and the design of high efficiency organic electronic devices for solar cell applications.
Investigation and improvement of these structures not only furthers our understanding of photophysical processes in organic semiconductors, but also impacts the world by providing inexpensive, renewable, green energy.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The resilience of human-nature systems at the nexus of food, energy, and water (FEW) is threatened by environmental change such as increasing climate extremes, growing population demands, and evolving land use.
Actionable strategies for improving both U.S. and China's agricultural, economic, and environmental sustainability must be developed through better understanding of how their mutual interactions with climate affect the evolution of the coupled FEW systems.
The research project integrates state-of-the-art knowledge and modeling capabilities in climate, hydrologic, agronomic, biogeochemical, engineering, and economic sciences.
The investigation will build a framework to realistically couple, predict and apply interactive water, carbon, and nitrogen cycle processes with agricultural practices, resource management and government policies to address critical issues of vulnerability, resilience and sustainability in regional FEW systems.
The U.S.-China comparison will determine the importance of human activities in enhancing or reducing FEW system resilience, and thereby to provide science-based decision support to navigate sustainable resources use for food and energy crops production.
The project includes an international exchange program to support education of the next generation of scientists in a transdisciplinary research framework in which the cross-fertilization of ideas is central.
Students will be engaged in all aspects of the project and collaborate with senior scientists in both U.S. and China teams, preparing these broadly trained researchers on new approaches critical for the future.
<br/><br/>The overarching goal of this project is to develop, evaluate, and apply a coupled modeling framework to address the adaptability of China's Food production-Energy development-Water supply systems (CFEW).
The framework will incorporate environmental changes and human activities in the Yellow River Basin, where demands on these systems are in sharp conflict.
The study will include the production of the main food and bioenergy crops; energy development from hydropower, coal reserves and biomass feedstocks; and the water supply management that includes reservoir operation, flood control, and irrigation strategy.
The proposed approach explicitly incorporates interdependency, human-centric, and extremality hypotheses to enable deeper understanding of the natural-socioeconomic interactions underpinning China's FEW systems resilience and sustainability.
The primary objectives are to: (1) develop CFEW to represent the multi-scale interactions and coevolution of regional FEW systems with climate and hydrologic processes responding to major environmental factors and human interventions; (2) understand key feedback mechanisms driving FEW systems and regional differences linking natural variations with human activities; (3) determine potential thresholds in these systems at which changes to human activities damage China's food, energy and water security and overall system resilience and adaptability, and (4) identify sustainable food and energy production pathways under limited land/water resources along with effective uses of the diversion water to contain these damages.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The award supports research in algebraic geometry, a central branch of mathematics which aims to understand, both practically and conceptually, solutions of systems of polynomial equations in many variables.
Algebraic geometry has important applications to other fields of mathematics, such as number theory, topology, and analysis, as well as to physics, biology, cryptography, and engineering.
Young researchers including graduate students will be involved in this project.<br/><br/>The PI will work on a variety of topics centered around degenerations of algebraic varieties and functorial, geometrically meaningful compactifications of their moduli spaces.
The central part of the project is the study of functorial compactifications of moduli spaces of K-trivial varieties, such as K3 surfaces, hyperkahler varieties, Calabi-Yau varieties, and abelian varieties, including both explicit descriptions of these compactifications, as well as their properties such as Kodaira dimension and canonical models.
A separate project is on the volumes of log surfaces.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This project explores the health impacts of intensive mothering.
Women spend far more time with their children today than in the past several decades.
The high cost to parenting may create tensions between investment in children and investment in self.
Three principal research questions are addressed: 1) How intensive mothering beliefs and behaviors affect maternal physical health; 2) How the effects in 1) vary by social class and employment status; and 3) How the relationship between intensive mothering and child health is affected by maternal physical health.
Findings will have implications for both formal health policies and more informal advocacy for maternal self-care.<br/><br/>This study will conduct a longitudinal analysis using panel data from the Avon Longitudinal Survey of Parents and Children (ALSPAC).
This will allow disentangling of the relationships between modern motherhood, maternal health, and child health.
The project will address past contradictory evidence on motherhood, social class, and employment status.
In addition, it will address recent debates in the literature surrounding the operationalization of intensive mothering.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
There is a tension in neuroscience between the emergent phenomena of interested, such as learning and memory, and the level at which most data are acquired.
For example, numerous experimental labs study how the strengths of synaptic connections and their dynamics affect cognition by establishing empirical correlations between in vitro electrophysiology measurements and data collected in animal behavioral experiments.
However, these correlations fall short of causal explanations: to date, there exist no mechanisms connecting recordings in individual neurons and synapses with cognitive learning dynamics.
The problem is not due to a lack of observations at either the neuronal or the systemic level; rather, it reflects a principal gap in our ability to link these two scales.
Even if a full description of every neuron in the brain could be produced, there would still be a gap in our ability to transition from local data to making qualitative conclusions about how it combines to produce systemic cognitive outcomes.
Addressing this problem requires a conceptual framework encompassing a computational model that would link the experimentally derived characteristics of individual cells with effects of those characteristics at the ensemble level.<br/> <br/>The proposed research aims to provide a way to establish such a connection: developing a data-driven, systemic model of hippocampal spatial learning based on the parameters of the hippocampal synaptic architecture, including the parameters of synaptic plasticity, using novel topological and geometric techniques.
Recent developments in Algebraic Topology will be used to integrate the parameters of synaptic connectivity and synaptic plasticity (e.g., long- and short-term potentiation and depression), to study structure of this map, the mechanisms of its formation and deterioration, and to evaluate the time required to produce a spatial map of a given environment, etc.
This project is a natural evolution of prior work done by the Dabaghian group on modeling the mechanisms of spatial learning, based on algebraic topology methods developed by the M?moli group.
The theory-based insight into learning phenomena will produce a qualitatively better understanding of how to interpret data, how to design new experiments, what variables should be targeted in measurements, as well as how to minimize use of animals, and in general how to optimize use physical and intellectual resources.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The 17th International Conference on Permutation Patterns will be held at University of Zurich in Switzerland from June 17 to June 21, 2019.
The 18th edition of the conference will be held at Valparaiso University (Valparaiso, Indiana) from June 29 to July 3, 2020.
The conference will provide a high quality program of speakers in the area of permutation patterns with opportunities for collaboration between junior and senior researchers, as well as between participants from around the world.
Each year the conference will feature two plenary one-hour speakers and a number of contributed talks, each thirty minutes long.
Researchers will present their new results and there will be time for open discussions to explore unsolved problems in the field.
This award supports travel to the conference by students and early career mathematicians from the United States.
This conference is part of a series of annual conferences devoted to the area of permutation patterns.
Ever since the first conference in 2003, which was hosted by the University of Otago in New Zealand, it has been held every year at different institutions around the world: in North America, Europe, and Australasia.<br/><br/>The conference will feature current research in the area of permutation patterns and its applications.
Major themes in the conference include the structural theory of pattern classes, asymptotic behavior of pattern classes, generalized pattern avoidance, packing densities, and algorithmic and decidability problems.
Research in the area is influenced by theoretical computer science, and traces its historical origins to the study of sorting machines.
Combinatorial interest in permutation patterns focuses on centrally important enumeration and packing problems, for instance the extremal problem to determine how one pattern can be embedded as often as possible in a permutation.
The statistics of permutations also enters into the picture, garnering attention from probabilists.
The conference is expected to have a wide impact on a variety of different research areas in mathematics and computer science.
The website for the 2019 conference is at https://sites.google.com/view/permutation-patterns-2019/ and more information about the conference series is available at: https://blogs.valpo.edu/permpat/.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Minimal rigorous research has been conducted on the effect of various supports for quality mathematics instruction and providing guidance on the development and use of Elementary Mathematics Specialists (EMSs) on student achievement.
Portland Public Schools (PPS), Portland State University, and RMC Research Corporation will study the Developing Leaders Transforming Practice (DLTP) intervention, which aims to improve teachers' instructional practices, increase student mathematics understanding and achievement.
The project team will evaluate the efficacy and use of EMSs by testing four implementation models that consider the various ways EMSs are integrated into schools.
DLTP builds on EMS research, investigating EMSs both as elementary mathematics teachers and coaches by articulating four models and examining their efficacy for both student and teacher learning.
This study has the potential to provide benefits both within and beyond PPS as it informs the preparation and use of EMSs.
Determining which model is best in certain contexts provides a focus for the expansion of mathematics support.
<br/><br/>DLTP enhances the research base by examining the effect of teacher PD on student achievement through a rigorous quasi-experimental design.
The project goals will be met by addressing 4 research questions: 1) What is the effect of the intervention on teacher leadership?
; 2) What is the effect of the intervention on teachers' use of research-based instructional practices?
; 3) What is the effect of the intervention on a school's ability to sustain ongoing professional learning for teachers?
; and 4) What is the effect of the intervention on student mathematics achievement?
Twelve elementary schools in PPS will select elementary teachers to participate in the DLTP and adopt an implementation model that ranges from direct to diffuse engagement with students: elementary mathematics teacher, grade level coach, grade-level and building-level coach, or building-level coach.
The research team will conduct 4 major studies that include rigorous quasi-experimental designs and a multi-method approach to address the research questions: leadership study, instructional practices study, school study, and student achievement study.
Several tools will be created by the project - a leadership rubric designed to measure changes in EMS mathematics leadership because of the project and a 5-part teacher survey designed capture EMS leadership skills, pedagogical content knowledge, use of research-based practices, and school climate for mathematics learning as well as implementation issues.<br/><br/>The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Excessive nitrogen (N) releases from wastewater treatment plants can lead to ecosystem harm through eutrophication.
Eutrophication is the excessive growth of algae stimulated by N. In extreme cases, eutrophication can lead to widespread loss of oxygen and fish kills when the algae die.
N in wastewater is typically removed by oxidation to nitrate in a process called nitrification and subsequent reduction to gaseous nitrogen in a process called denitrification.
Nitrification and denitrification have been used for N removal in wastewater treatment plants for decades.
However, this process is highly energy intensive.
More recently treatment plants have sought to utilize ANaerobic AMMonia OXidation (ANAMMOX) to remove N with less energy.
ANAMMOX has been adopted internationally, with several full-scale plants currently operational.
In contrast, the acceptance of ANAMMOX in the United States has been relatively limited.
This is due in part to concerns about process inhibition due to external perturbations.
In this project, researchers will study the effect of external perturbations by nitrite, sulfide and recalcitrant carbon on ANAMMOX process stability.
This will be achieved by studying the response of the microbial community to these perturbations in laboratory scale reactors.
The research team will collaborate with the wastewater treatment utility DC Water.
Graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students will obtain industrial and entrepreneurial experiences though this collaboration.
This project will significantly enhance our understanding of the ANAMMOX process, potentially leading to successful full-scale applications in the United States.
The project focus on managing the N cycle directly addresses one the "14 Grand Challenges of the 21st Century" identified by the National Academy of Engineering.
<br/><br/><br/> <br/>Despite over three decades of extensive research, several factors still prevent widespread implementation of the ANAMMOX process for wastewater treatment.
Currently, there are no studies that have focused on understanding the response of ANAMMOX reactors to external perturbations at the proteomic and molecular levels, and very few studies have examined the role of other bacteria (i.e.
flanking community) in ANAMMOX enrichments.
This project will address these knowledge gaps by generating fundamental information on ANAMMOX communities using metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and proteomics.
These results will enable more robust engineering control and adoption of this innovative nitrogen cycling technology to address managing the nitrogen cycle as one of the National Academy of Engineering "14 Engineering Grand Challenges of the 21st Century".
This project will be carried out by a collaboration between researchers at the University of Utah and the wastewater treatment utility DC Water.
Utah researchers will provide expertise in fundamental science of reactor operation, bacterial community analysis, bacterial biokinetic and toxicity analysis, while DC Water will provide student training and internship opportunities for the translation of the work into full scale application.
The goal of this project is to elucidate the complete functional gene network under different perturbations in the ANAMMOX process.
Successful development of this network will help engineers and scientists to understand process upsets and facilitate the design and wider adoption of efficient and resilient ANAMMOX systems.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Member of religious groups sometimes perceive and experience hostility and discrimination at work.
It is important  to understand the complexities of such work experiences because the workplace is a primary setting in which social group assimilation and integration occur.
Work also is the primary vehicle through which most people realize social opportunity and upward mobility.
Some workers make their religious affiliations visible through clothing and/or other aspects of personal appearance.
This project examines how the visibility of religious identities affects professional women and men in the workplace.
This project has three goals.
First, the project will examine gendered differences in religious expression within the workplace.
Second, it will determine how those who signify religious expression at work  navigate career advancement.
Third, it will explore the strategies such workers use to accommodate/challenge workplace expectations that may be affected by their religious expression.
Findings from this research will help policy makers and employers create public policy and constructive workplace practices to address inequalities and discrimination based upon religious expression at work.
As such, findings are relevant to enforcement of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that prohibits discrimination at many workplaces based on characteristics such as race, religion and sex.
<br/><br/>This project uses 60 qualitative interviews to compare three sets of employees in professional jobs:  20 women who signify religious affiliation at work, 20 women who do not signify religious affiliation at work, and 20 men who signify religious affiliation at work.
Respondents will be drawn from a variety of professional fields, and identified through a combination of personal contacts and snowball sampling.
Interview questions include educational background, age, marital status, average hours worked, income, and work history.
Additional questions will probe for reasons behind their decisions to either signify or not signify religious identity at work.
Interview data will be subjected to open coding to derive themes present in the data using NVIVO to manage transcripts and data analysis.
Findings will inform sociological theory related to religious expression at work, as well as gender differences in workplace treatment among professionals.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Materials that undergo sharp transitions in their conductivity upon external stimulus represent an emerging class of semiconductors.
These materials could affect future computing technologies and opto-electronic devices.
Understanding the microscopic nature of the transitions is important to model their behavior.
In this project, the PIs will collaboratively explore the role of atomic scale defects introduced by doping in controlling the conductivity and how it varies spatially within the material.
This will be accomplished by combination of high-spatial resolution scanning probe microscopy that is sensitive to conductivity at the nanoscale and theoretical modeling of electrical conduction in the sample containing varying concentrations of such defects.
In addition to research, the PIs will participate in educational and outreach activities including engaging high school students from diverse backgrounds in the Atlanta area to participate in physics research.<br/><br/><br/>Perovskite nickelates undergo insulator-metal transitions that can be modulated by external stimuli such as temperature, pressure as well as growth protocols.
Microscopic understanding of the phase transition with emphasis on scanning probe techniques will be accomplished by using integrated high-resolution experimental nanoscale near-field imaging and spectroscopy techniques covering infrared to THz, theoretical calculations and Monte Carlo Simulations.
The research will impact electronic and optical materials engineering and devices, fundamental physics, and materials science.
The results will enable fundamental quantitative understanding of the first order phase transition of correlated oxides at high-spatial resolution and will have a significant impact on future electronics and photonics, sensing, neuromorphic devices.
The research and integrated education plan will promote undergraduate and graduate materials and nano-optoelectronic education in the Athens/Atlanta area.
The work throughout this research will provide participating students, including those from underrepresented groups, with advanced multidisciplinary skills to tackle challenging condensed matter/materials physics problems.
The project will include development of new courses, undergraduate research and advising and provide travel fellowships for students from other institutions to attend Workshops.
The PIs will integrate research into outreach activities for high school physics teacher(s)/students' education and training as well as community outreach that targets African immigrant students/families and African American youth in the Athens/Atlanta area.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge.
Business, industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity breaches.
The growth of cyber-threats has created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge and skills.
Nationwide, employer surveys indicate that only a small percentage of universities and colleges fully prepare graduates for cybersecurity jobs.
Colorado is a major hub for cybersecurity jobs, with over 9,000 open cybersecurity positions in the Denver Metro and Colorado Springs areas, which are served by the college.
Over 1,200 of these jobs can be filled by individuals who have an Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree.
This project will prepare well-qualified cybersecurity professionals and information security analysts to benefit the regional workforce.
The project will create and implement a responsive AAS cybersecurity program aligned with business needs and Federal standards.
The approach will focus on integrating experiential and project-based learning to provide students with real-world experiences, to create seamless continuity from classroom to workforce, and to equip students with 21st-century employability skills.
The college intends to achieve a Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense designation.
This designation, along with mapping the curriculum to the Federal standards, will equip students with the necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities to protect and defend the nation's infrastructure.
The project will also focus on increasing the participation of women in cybersecurity.
<br/><br/>The project has three goals: (1) to address the unmet demand for cybersecurity technicians in the region served by the college; (2) to enhance gender diversity in cybersecurity by recruiting more female students into the program (the aim is for at least 20% of the students to be women); and (3) to improve retention and persistence in the attainment of an AAS degree in cybersecurity.
The project will adopt, adapt, and evaluate materials and methods developed through the Colorado Community College System, the National CyberWatch Center, and other NSF Advanced Technological Education projects.
It will also develop a new course in Security Risk Management.
Collaboration with a regional Business and Industry Leadership Team will ensure that the project can create a robust curriculum that provides seamless continuity from the classroom to the workplace and meets industry standards.
In addition, collaboration with a subject matter expert on diversity and organizational change, along with partnerships with high schools, will facilitate the recruitment, retention, and completion of women in the college's cybersecurity program.
By using distance education and remote-access labs, the project will reach beyond Colorado.
The new courses that are developed will be added to the CCCS database and will be available for all 13 colleges in the system and other colleges across the nation.
The best practices that are discovered will be disseminated nationally through the National CyberWatch Center, ATE Central, the Community College Cyber Summit, and the National Convergence Technology Center, as well as through national conferences that focus on cybersecurity and experiential education.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The Internet of things (IoT) market for smart homes, buildings, and cities, is expected to reach over a half trillion dollars in size by 2021.
Today's IoT technology landscape is the culmination of many decades of research, but large-scale IoT deployments are still hard to setup, configure, and manage, and this process is often laborious and time-consuming.
This project will develop a new distributed computing substrate called "Groups of Things (GoT)".
GoT consists of several software building blocks on top of which IoT applications can be built easily and flexibly for environments like smart homes, buildings, campuses, and cities, bringing us closer to the vision of making these deployments truly robust, scalable, self-sufficient, and self-managing.
GoT adapts, for IoT settings, three important distributed computing primitives that have been successful in datacenters and cloud computing, namely--membership, coordination, and storage.
The applications built by this project atop GoT provide an opportunity to explore the approach of designing systems with a human-first philosophy, for the IoT setting.
The project's activities include designing algorithms, analyzing them formally, implementing them in real devices including Raspberry Pis, and deploying them in real buildings on the University of Illinois campus.
The project will produce open software and engage with industry in the IoT and wireless sector to maximize industry impact of ideas from the project.
Educational contributions include developing modules for online MOOCs and working with students from under-represented groups in K-12, undergraduate school, and graduate school.
<br/> <br/>Technically, this project will build a new abstraction for IoT Networks, called the "Groups of Things (GoT)" substrate.
The work includes designing and analyzing new distributed algorithms, techniques, and systems and implementations, for three specific foundational building blocks: 1) distributed failure detection and membership in IoT networks; 2) distributed coordination in IoT networks; and 3) distributed IoT small object storage (iSoS).
The solutions to these three components are tightly integrated, leveraging each other (latter ones build atop former ones).
Because of the fluid and failure-prone nature of IoT environments, the project's philosophy is to design using probabilistic techniques--such techniques have been shown to work well in internet-based distributed systems (such as clouds and datacenters).
These techniques are analyzable and have provable behavior in a variety of scenarios.
The researchers will also implement applications atop the GoT substrate, including the first distributed command and control interface that realizes ACID abstractions (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) inspired by transactional databases.
The project's implementations will be in state-of-the-art IoT platforms such as Raspberry Pis.
Experiments will be performed via both real traces using a simulation and using real deployments inside buildings at the University of Illinois campus.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Congestion is familiar to anyone who relies on a privately owned or rented automobile, taxi, or public transit for commuting, shopping and errand running.
Historically, engineers and scientists exploring traffic networks frequently build mathematical models with the intent of coaxing from them insights revealing how congestion may evolve over time.
Unfortunately, such models may easily become so large and complex that they are unwieldly, and simplifications are needed in order to provide passengers and drivers with accurate and rapidly computable information pertinent to route choice and departure time selection.
Toward that goal, this project will employ modern statistics, simulation experiments, and notions of competition among traffic network users for available road capacity to better depict and more efficiently compute the behaviors of drivers who rely on road networks.
The broader impacts of this research will be substantial.
In particular, the results of this research will allow commuters and urban freight carriers to make more informed travel decisions, and governmental organizations to better regulate travel decisions within heavily congested major metropolitan regions.
This study will also provide system-level experiential learning opportunities for students entering the transportation workforce.
<br/><br/>Specifically, through a combination of experiments and machine learning and model development, this project will aim to depict the noncooperative exploration of available routes and departure times by drivers and passengers seeking to fulfill their travel demands via metropolitan road networks.
A key goal of the intended research will be the efficient computation of solutions to the most prevalent type of dynamic traffic assignment (DTA), namely so-called dynamic user equilibrium (DUE).
It is the lack of closed-form travel-delay operators that makes DUE computation tedious and slow.
The plan is to replace the existing, differential algebraic equation (DAE) system representing travel delay with closed-form, approximate delay operators based on a form of statistical learning known as Kriging.
Ad hoc experiments based on such an approach show great promise for small networks, but are not definitive.
The PIs will develop the envisioned models and make developed software available as free-ware or inexpensive apps.
This project was awarded through the "National Science Foundation (NSF) / National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Joint Research on Environmental Sustainability Challenges" opportunity.
The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus is described as complex and inter-related global resource systems that rely on different ecosystem resources.
FEW Nexus problems stem from the imbalance of different user activities, such as agricultural and water-use practices, that do not maintain the integrity of ecosystems that provide the resources for those activities.
A more specific example of a FEW Nexus problem is the use of fertilizer for agriculture coupled with wastewater treatment practices.
The current economic model of fertilizer utilization is unsustainable for multiple reasons.
Ammonia fertilizer is produced through the energy-intensive and expensive Haber Bosch process, and phosphorus for fertilizer is mined at considerable cost.
Energy and chemicals are further consumed for the removal of fertilizer-associated nutrients from wastewater from agricultural run-off to prevent environmental and public health problems.
At the same time, pharmaceuticals in wastewater are contaminants of emerging concern (CECs), but conventional treatment plants are unable to adequately remove all nutrients and CECs.
Consequently, nitrogen, phosphorus, and pharmaceuticals pollute surface, ground, and coastal waters when the inadequately treated wastewater treatment plant effluent is discharged to the environment.
A new paradigm is needed to enable the transformations to i) economically and environmentally sustainable nutrient reuse and ii) a safer and more effective management strategy for CECs in wastewater.
Urine streams are rich in nutrients and have high concentrations of pharmaceuticals.
However, urine is immediately diluted over 100 times by flushing and subsequent mixing with other wastewater streams, making it difficult to separate CECs and nutrient pollutants.
A more rational approach would be to take advantage of the high concentrations of the nutrients and contaminants in undiluted urine by carrying out source-separation for decentralized resource recovery and pharmaceutical degradation, rather than treating the diluted urine at centralized wastewater treatment plants .
This international collaborative project between the U.S. institutions of Columbia University and Vanderbilt University, and the Harbin Institute of Technology in China proposes an integrated treatment approach for source-separated urine, comprising i) ammonia recovery, ii) phosphate extraction, and iii) pharmaceutical degradation, to simultaneously achieve sustainable on-site nutrient recycling and contaminant elimination.
Advancing fundamental knowledge on decentralized technologies for nutrient recovery and reuse and CEC elimination in urine source-separation and management will yield transformative impacts to enable the evolution of current wastewater management approaches to a more sustainable "resource recovery" approach.<br/><br/>The goals of this project are to enhance fundamental knowledge of the principal phenomena governing nitrogen and phosphorous recovery and pharmaceutical degradation in source-separated urine, and to assess the high-level impacts of implementing decentralized wastewater management.
Specific objectives are: 1) to advance fundamental understanding of ammonia and water vapor transport across hydrophobic microporous membranes, 2) elucidate the fouling mechanisms during ammonia recovery from hydrolyzed source-separated urine, and formulate appropriate fouling control strategies, 3) investigate the degradation of model pharmaceutical compounds by advanced oxidation processes, 4) evaluate the fate of model pharmaceutical compounds and heavy metals in phosphate recovery by induced precipitation, and 5) assess the national-level environmental and public health impacts of large-scale implementation of urine source-separation in the U.S. and China.
This study will investigate nutrient recovery and pharmaceutical degradation of diverted urine to elucidate the common denominators influencing the different phenomena of, and identify the overall achievable performance of, ammonia separation, phosphate extraction, and pharmaceutical degradation through integrated research.
The project will advance fundamental knowledge on the benefits and costs of implementing urine source-separation and decentralized treatment in the U.S. and China.
Critical insights from the specific research tasks have far-reaching impacts on individual topics, including i) enhanced transport theory of vapor in micropores, ii) improving the understanding of fouling and fouling mitigation in membrane distillation, iii) identification of principal factors governing advanced oxidation processes for pharmaceuticals, and iv) elucidation of contaminant fate in phosphate precipitation.
This collaborative project will integrate education and research to train and prepare graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in STEM.
The researchers will engage in activities including: (i) recruitment of under-represented groups, (ii) development of nutrient and microcontaminant modules for K-12 education and public outreach, (iii) providing undergraduate research opportunities through structured programs, and (iv) enhancing undergraduate and graduate education by integrating scientific concepts and technical principles of the research current courses.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Giulia Palermo from the University of California, Riverside, to investigate the molecular basis of DNA cleavage and specificity in the CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat)-Cas9 system through computational methods.
The CRISPR-Cas9 technology is a method that makes precise modification of the genome of an organism (including that of humans) possible.
The technology is based on the use of a nuclease, an enzyme capable of cutting the double stranded DNA, and an RNA molecule that is bound to the enzyme and guides the enzyme to the site in the DNA where the cut is to take place.
This research seeks to understand the mechanism by which the enzyme functions using computational methods developed by Dr. Palermo and her collaborators.
The results of this study may aid in the development of more efficient genome editing technologies and their applications in biological research, biofuels production, and the development of drought-resistant crops with enhanced nutritional value.
The project involves an outreach and mentoring program, which includes hands-on sessions for high school students from underrepresented minority groups and teachers.<br/><br/>CRISPR-Cas9 is a bacterial adaptive immune system that is revolutionizing basic and applied life sciences by enabling a facile genome editing technology.
This project provides detailed understanding of how this system edits and manipulates nucleic acids, which is of importance for improving the genome editing capability.
This research project seeks to characterize the mechanism of DNA cleavage and specificity of the Streptococcus Pyogenes (Sp) CRISPR-Cas9 system by using state-of-the-art computational methods.
The project employs a mixed quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approach and ab-initio Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations (using the Born-Oppenheimer and Car-Parrinello approaches) in combination with free energy methods to investigate the catalytic mechanism of DNA cleavage in CRISPR-Cas9.
These methodologies may elucidate the catalytic role of metal ions, which are critical for the enzymatic processing of DNA.
Classical MD and enhanced sampling techniques are employed to investigate the mechanism of DNA specificity, characterizing the conformational changes arising from the binding of altered DNA sequences and how they affect the catalysis.
Theoretical investigations are performed in collaboration with experimentalists.
The new theory assists in the interpretation of experimental data and makes possible predictions that can be tested in the laboratory.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2019, Research Using Biological Collections.
The fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in innovative ways.
This research focuses on the morphology of fish skin, specifically, the microscopic scales called denticles on sharks and rays.
Denticles have many proposed functions, including protection from predators, abrasion reduction, and alteration of water flow over the body.
Shape characteristics of denticles are known to differ among species as well as along different positions of the body within an individual.
Denticle shape is thought to alter water flow along the body of fish, by decreasing hydrodynamic drag.
The functional significance of these scales is of particular interest because sharks and rays use many different ways of swimming, and there are many different denticle sizes and shapes.
By comparing skin form with function, the fellow will answer questions about fish biology, including evolution, locomotion, and habitat.
The Fellow will gain understanding of fish functional morphology by learning new techniques, including robotic testing of 3D printed skin.
The results will also be important for learning about underwater locomotion for human use.
The Fellow will  work closely with the Atlantic White Shark Conservancy to develop a hands-on teaching seminar for young girls interested in shark research.
<br/><br/>The fellow will use elasmobranch specimens from the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology to conduct a large-scale comparative analysis of denticle shape.
The Fellow will be trained in multiple three-dimensional (3D) imaging techniques to examine denticle morphology of species that employ various locomotor modes (i.e.
axial-undulatory and pectoral-fin propulsors).
The Fellow will use gel-based profilometry, which determines surface metrology variables (i.e.
denticle roughness) together with micro-computed tomography, to create 3D models of individual denticles along various parts of an animal's body.
These models will be used in a high-resolution 3D printer to produce a flexible material for quantitative hydrodynamic testing to investigate the fine-scale fluid dynamics produced by the skin denticles.
Understanding how the morphology of the denticles contributes to hydrodynamic function and the ecology of elasmobranchs is important for understanding the structural and functional evolution of elasmobranchs and to design more efficient biomimetic materials for underwater locomotion for human use.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Black holes are the best laboratories for studying gravity.
In the center of our galaxy, the Milky Way, lies a massive black hole that weighs four million times the mass of our Sun.
The spacetime around this black hole is curved by its mass and twisted by its rotation.
This project aims to study the deformed spacetime around the Milky Way's central black hole by monitoring the motions of special types of stars orbiting the black hole.
These peculiar stars emit bright radio-frequency lasers (called masers) that radio telescopes can observe and measure very precisely.
Radio telescopes in Chile and New Mexico will track the motions of these maser stars in three dimensions and map out the spacetime around our nearest massive black hole.
The main goals of this project are to study gravity in the center of our galaxy, to promote science education at all levels, and to make this science publicly accessible.
<br/><br/>The investigators measure the positions, velocities, and accelerations of stars in the central few light years of the Milky Way, as they react to the gravitational field of the supermassive black hole (SMBH), stars, and stellar remnants in the Galactic Center.
This is done through Doppler tracking of stellar atmosphere silicon monoxide (SiO) masers using the NSF's Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array and the Very Large Array.
With a series of observations, the investigators provide a reference frame for infrared observations of stars orbiting the SMBH and probe the dark stellar remnant population.
By tracking these stars, the investigators can measure the spin and mass of the central black hole and test the equivalence principle, the "no-hair" theorem of black holes, and frame-dragging.
<br/><br/>This program will train new scientists and create synergy between theoretical and observational studies of gravity.
The investigators will bring the research into the classroom and the public domain.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be directly involved in the research and in outreach to traditionally under-represented groups in STEM fields, including minorities, women, first-generation college students, and rural communities.
Animated theoretical and observational visualization of the motions of stars close to a massive black hole will be developed for the Science on a Sphere (SOS) program and distributed to the roughly 150 SOS installations worldwide.
The investigators will adapt the visualizations for digital planetarium presentation, using Colorado's Fiske Planetarium as a development testbed, and distribute them to all digital facilities for maximum impact.
This project will enable communication of the broad ideas of gravity, relativity and black holes to the public and to K-12 schools.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
The auto industry is changing faster today than it has in 100 years.
These changes disrupt many traditional facets of this industry.
For example, cybersecurity is now a major safety challenge for automakers working on automated vehicles, and current projections are that a quarter billion connected vehicles will be on the road by 2020.
With these changes, the need for automotive technicians is expected to increase while the work becomes more technically complex.
With support from NSF, Center for Advanced Automotive Technology (CAAT) responded to increasing employment opportunities in this employment segment, which offers sustainable wage employment.
In this role, CAAT served as a communication conduit and connector between education and industry to expand the scope and availability of technicians and technologists in the automotive sector.
In 2018, CAAT transitioned to become the NSF Advanced Technological Education Resource Center for Advanced Automotive Technology (RCAAT).
RCAAT aims to support the ability of industry and education to keep pace with the technological advances in the automotive industry.<br/><br/>RCAAT's leadership team will work closely with auto manufacturers and their suppliers to determine emerging education needs, and to ensure that the materials shared through RCAAT can prepare a skilled technical workforce that meets the needs of automotive industry employers.
Through meetings, conferences, and reports, RCAAT will remain an essential connection point between academia, government, and industry to provide and disseminate vital advanced automotive technology education resources.
The workforce necessary for tomorrow's automotive industry needs access to appropriate and effective education today.
RCAAT aims to contribute to meeting this technological education need by expanding its library of industry-reviewed and industry-approved curricula and learning resources.
In addition, the center will continue to provide a collaborative network for professional development for educators in programs supporting the rapidly evolving automotive industry.
This project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Advanced Applicator Technicians mix and/or apply pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, or insecticides through sprays, dusts, vapors, soil incorporation, or chemical applications.
These jobs are critical for the modern agriculture industry as they help ensure strong yields for farmers and agriculture management companies.
As the agriculture sector continues to modernize and become more precision-based, the Applicator Technician position is also modernizing and now requires greater technical expertise and training.
Due to the shortage of a qualified candidate pool, agribusiness organizations often struggle to fill applicator positions.
Existing programs at community colleges are designed for either general agriculture or equipment technicians and do not specifically address the specialized knowledge required by an Applicator Technician.
The goal of this project is to meet the educational and training needs of this critical sector by preparing highly skilled technicians and creating pathways for educational advancement in the state of Illinois.<br/><br/>The project will create four new courses, a professional certificate program, and a two-year Associate of Applied Science degree to prepare students and incumbent workers for careers as Advanced Applicator Technicians.
The creation of these credentials builds on previously developed precision agriculture coursework through Parkland's prior NSF-ATE funded Precision Agriculture Curriculum Enhancement project.
Additionally, the project will build relationships with high schools and industries, to increase understanding and interest in the Applicator Technician sector, thus contributing to a regional workforce pipeline.
The project will also seek to improve the representation of veterans in the precision agriculture sector to ensure agribusiness industries have a diverse workforce.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments.
This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will consider how research on imaginative thinking, and perspectives on the role of imagination in STEM practice and STEM education, can be systematically applied to support STEM learning in museum contexts.
Common conceptions of science as non-imaginative are persistent, but scholarship across disciplines suggests critical roles for imagination, both in the practice of STEM and in shaping learners' perceptions of themselves as part of STEM.
Further, evidence from the fields of neuroscience, psychology, child development and education suggests ways that imagination can be fostered and improved, and that these understandings could be applied to the design of museum experiences in order to improve STEM outcomes.
<br/><br/>The activities of this project, led by the Museum of Science, Boston, both synthesize and generate knowledge at the intersections of imagination, STEM, and education practice in ways that are actionable for museum professionals.
Activities include: a literature review, a document review, and a survey of ISE professionals; an in-person convening of STEM professionals (researchers, practitioners, educators and others); and the development and dissemination of products designed to inform future project development.
The goals of the project are to: 1) prompt conversations about imaginative thinking across the Informal Science Education (ISE) field, and between ISE and other fields; 2) identify priority areas for research and development that can advance the field's understandings at the intersections of imagination, STEM, and learning; and 3) catalyze future research and development efforts that can advance the field.
The intent is for the integration scholarship on imagination, STEM, and learning within museums' research and development efforts to lead to projects that describe, test, and refine theoretical frameworks and concrete strategies for supporting imaginative thinking among public audiences through exhibitions, programs, and other designed experiences.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Recent research has witnessed rapid advances in metal halide perovskite materials for applications in solar cells, light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, lasers, and scintillators for spectroscopic gamma-ray detection and/or X-ray imaging due to their superior optoelectronic properties.
Defects in perovskites can limit the transport of charge carriers and change the carrier concentrations.
The ability to understand and recognize defects in perovskites is the key to control the performance in perovskite-based devices.
This collaborative research aims to relate optoelectronic properties with defects in one-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals.
These nanocrystals can be exploited either individually or as building blocks in the assembly of nanostructured materials and devices.
These devices would be used in energy and biomedical applications, including optoelectronics, photonics, sensors, catalysis, nanotechnology, and biotechnology, among other emerging areas.
As such, it transitions fundamental scientific discoveries into useful technologies that benefit society.
This project offers opportunities for underrepresented female and minority undergraduate students as well as high school teachers and students to participate in nanomaterials research at both Georgia Tech and California State University-Bakersfield.
<br/><br/>In one-dimensional (1D) metal halide perovskites, defects, if present, are expected to exert a pronounced influence on the carrier transport behaviors and thus the electronic and optoelectronic properties.
It is therefore of crucial importance to identify, understand, control, and possibly utilize defects in perovskite crystals.
This collaborative research between Georgia Tech and California State University-Bakersfield seeks to craft 1D perovskite nanocrystals with precisely controlled dimensions, scrutinize their dimension-dependent optical properties, and correlate the resulting optoelectronic properties of these perovskite nanocrystals with defects via directly imaging defects and local transport barriers under optical excitations by capitalizing on a contactless dielectric force microscopy technique.
The systematic investigation into the optical properties and defect characteristics of these monodisperse 1D perovskite nanocrystals enables the development of high-quality perovskite nanomaterials with desired optoelectronic properties and minimal deleterious defects, thereby rendering their use in a gamut of optoelectronic devices with improved performance.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
This grant will support meetings of the Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar (PNGS) to be held at the University of British Columbia, the University of Washington, the University of Oregon, Oregon State University, Portland State University, and Lewis & Clark College, beginning in Spring 2019.
PNGS meetings generally feature six invited research talks by leading experts in differential geometry and geometrical analysis.
The meetings also include discussion sessions in which the speakers and participants assess the state of various areas in geometry and highlight open problems in these areas.<br/><br/>There are a number of very active researchers in geometry scattered throughout the various colleges and universities involved in the Pacific Northwest Geometry Seminar.
PNGS meetings will bring these researchers together for consultation, collaboration, and stimulation of new ideas.
A significant number of research programs have been initiated as a result of interactions at past meetings.
The PNGS series is especially valuable for graduate students in geometry at the participating universities which have small geometry groups.
PNGS meetings give these students an excellent opportunity to see the broader picture of research in geometry.
The meetings are also very valuable for the growing number of geometers working at some of the smaller universities in the region, such as Pacific University, Seattle University, and Idaho State University.
More information can be found on the conference website: www.math.washington.edu/~lee/PNGS<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
Synthetic biology and nanotechnology place increasing demands on design methodologies to ensure dependable and robust operation.
Consisting of noisy and unreliable components, these complex systems have large and often infinite state spaces that include extremely rare error states.
Stochastic model checking techniques have demonstrated significant potential in quantitatively analyzing such system models under extremely low probability.
Unfortunately, they generally require enumerating the model's state space, which is computationally intractable or impossible.
Therefore, addressing these design challenges in emerging technologies requires enhancing the applicability of stochastic model checking.
Motivated by this problem, this project investigates an automated stochastic verification framework that integrates approximate stochastic model checking and counterexample-guided rare-event simulation to improve the analysis accuracy and efficiency.
<br/><br/><br/>This project focuses on verifying infinite-state continuous-time Markov chain models with rare-event properties.
It addresses the scalability problem by first applying property-guided and on-the-fly state truncation techniques to prune unlikely states to obtain finite state representations that are amenable to stochastic model checking.
In the case of false or indeterminate verification results, stochastic counterexamples are generated and utilized to improve the accuracy of the state reductions.
Furthermore, it mines these critical counterexamples as automated guidance to improve the quality and efficiency for rare-event stochastic simulations.
This verification framework will be integrated within existing state-of-the-art stochastic model checking tools, and benchmarked on a wide range of real-world case studies in synthetic biology and nanotechnology.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.
